Welcome! In this lecture we are going to be learning about
variables, how we declare them, how we assign to them, and most
importantly how we print them. So as you can see here, we have some text saying "After 10
steps, you are 5 meters away from home." But these are not just pointing
into our strings, into our text, they are actually declared
through variables here. So we're doing a substitution to
print them out in text. Let's get stuck right in!
So we want to give our user an indication of how far
through the game they are, so we might do this with a new print saying something
like ("After 0 steps,
you are X
meters away from
home.") like so. And we could say, you know, "After Y steps,"
so that is different every time that we print it.
OK, so you can see, what I'm doing here is I'm putting in some
substitutes for what I actually want to say.
Now, in programming, we call these substitutes variables,
because they're things that we want to vary. OK, so
how can we define a variable in programming? So,
just before this first print statement i'm going to add a new line, and that's where I'm
going to do this variable declaration as it's called.
Now, a variable has a type, so what kind of thing is
stored in it? Is it a number? is it a text string
like this, or is it perhaps a different type of
number, a floating point number? We'll go into the differences with that
a little bit later in this lecture. So this first one is an integer, because it's something you can
count on your fingers. So integer comes from the Latin word
digit. No it doesn't! It doesn't come from the Latin word!
So an integer is for basically a digit that you
can count on your fingers, it's 1, 2, etc. but not
something like 1.5. You can't have 1.5 fingers unless  you're lucky.
So there it is, the number of steps
taken is what we're trying to do. So number
OfSteps. And that is the name of the variable, that's how we're going
to refer to it in the rest of the code. And now we need to give this variable
an initial value, and in this case, we're going to start off
with 0. And remember, like I said, every line finishes off
with a semicolon. So let's just look at this line again!
I've got the type, then the name of the variable, then an
equals sign. Now this is what we call assignment, it
means that we are giving this variable the value on the right-hand side, this
0. So at the end of this line the variable, numberOfSteps,
will simply give us 0. Now that's all very
well and good, but what can we actually do with this? Well we can refer to it, later on, in our
code. So what we can do is, we can actually replace this Y
with number of steps, but we have to close the string first.
So we've created now two strings, the "After"
and "steps", and then, we're going to use the
plus symbol, or as it's called
an operator, to add these
strings and number and this variable, together. So numberOfSteps
plus. So we've got this string, plus this variable,
plus this string, and we'll see what that outputs!
I'm going to Save, go into Unity, and hit play!
OK, as you can see,
we've got now, "After 0 steps, you are X meters from home.", so we can
see that, that variable has been substituted into our string.
So I can change the variable to something else perhaps,
like 10 steps, and if I hit
play again, we should see that that is what is updated
in our string or out text. Here we go,
10 steps! So you can see that variable is actually getting substituted in
here. It's actually, It's taking it's value from this variable
declaration and assignment, more importantly, here.
Now, its' your turn for a bit of a challenge! I'd like you to add a
distance variable, you'll remember we saw that as an X here.
I would like you to basically assign a variable that does
that, so you need to declare a new variable with type float.
I'll leave you to decide what the name of the variable is going to be. Try and use something
descriptive, which actually describes what it holds.
Then, I'd like you to assign a value of 0.0f.
Now, don't worry about why that's different to why it's not just 0
that we're assigning, the reason is because it needs to be the same type
basically. It's not, This is the syntax for saying,
we want 0.0 as a floating point number, and
floating point numbers are things that we can't count on our fingers, such as
1.2 or 1.6 or
1.333, all those kind of numbers are going to be
floating point numbers. Then, we want to print the distance
from home, so I'll let you do that. Try and
do the same sort of thing as we did with our number
of steps. Then, I'd like you to try and
figure out what happens if you assign 0, instead of 0.0f.
What happens when you click play? What happens in the
IDE, does anything show you there might be an error?
OK, so pause the video and have a go at this little challenge!
OK welcome back! I hope you've all
had a go! Remember that attempting these challenges really does help your learning
massively. OK, let's dive in and have a go at this!
So the first thing I want to do is declare a new variable, and as I said, I want the
type to b float, like so. And what's a
good name? Maybe distance would be a good name, and I'm going to
assign 0.0f to it, like so,
lower case f. Remember that, we need,  the computer is very
fussy about reading this code. If we get things wrong like
a capital F, sometimes that will be a problem,
or if we just
type something wrong, you see that it knows that this doesn't
quite make sense. However, you can often
miss spaces, so things like this don't matter so much, spaces are not
what's so important, and you can generally put, wherever
there is one space you can put many many spaces, like so.
And sometimes this is useful, when you want formatting to be
nice and neat, but almost never do this, almost never add multiple
spaces, because it just looks a bit odd. One case where you might
do it is, if you wanted to nicely align these names
with the variables, and perhaps the equal sign sometimes programmers like
doing that for neatness. But we aren't going to be doing that, it just makes
it a little bit harder to keep your code up to date and we don't want that. So
let's stick with this convention, at the moment. Try and don't use more than
one space, wherever possible. The other thing you'll notice is,
all these lines are indented, that means they have the same amount of
space here to the left, and that allows
us to see that they are all part of this, between
these brackets. It just keeps things nice and neat and we can see
what is what. So we'll see more about indentation
in lectures coming up. OK
so we have our distance variable now,
and we want to add it into our print statement, so
let's do the same procedure as we did before. I'm just going to turn this into two strings,
this one and this one, and then, I'm going to put a
plus in the middle and a plus in the distance, like so.
OK let's hop back into Unity and see what
this does!
OK, now it says 0 meters from home. Let's just change that,
to make sure that we can do other things. So, like I said, numbers can be all
sorts of things like 1243.33, something like this.
And if I print that, it should
still give me that. So let's have a look! There you go,
we've got the floating point number! Now what happens if I try to put
this number? I'm just going to copy it and replace 10 with it.
Does that work? Now you can see, I get a red squiggly line
underneath, saying that it "Cannot implicitly convert from type 'float' to 'int'. "
So we're getting some indication of what these types are doing, we can't
mix and match them, just like that. Sometimes it works like we're seeing,
with the plus operator we're doing an int added to a
string, added to a float. There it works! So in some places it can do it
implicitly but here it can't, that's what it just told us.
How about if I put a 0 here, will that work?
I'll hit Save,
and then, I hit, we can hit play, see what that's going to work
out. Yeah, so in this case, it
has been able to do an implicit conversion from
the two, so I could perhaps put 5 as well.
Let's see whether that can be implicitly
converted. Yeah, that can also be implicitly
converted. But if we want to make sure that it's floating point number, it's
that syntax here, with the, make sure there's a decimal
point and making sure there is f at the end.
OK, so that is a challenge successfully completed! You have introduced
your your first variables! I'm looking forward to seeing you in the next lecture!